 The pathophysiology of social phobia is evolving as a result of research into brain connectivity and function and recent hypotheses regarding cognition. A functional connectivity study of 174 subjects, 78 of whom had social anxiety disorder, examined whether emotion regulation can be a transdiagnostic measure. Results showed that effectual regulation in the context of negative stimuli consisted of engagement of the Prefrontal Cortex (PFC) along with reduced amygdala reactivity, and greater symptom severity correlated with less engagement of the Dorsal Anterior Cingulate Cortex (DACC) and less functional connectivity between the amygdala and ventrolateral prefrontal cortex.
 [5]  Cognitive theories helpful in the understanding of the etiology of social phobia include the "Clark and Wells cognitive model of social phobia," which hypothesizes that self-focused attention, negative observer-perspective images of oneself, and safety behaviors maintain anxiety in subjects with social phobia and that this anxiety associates with observer-perspective imagery and safety-seeking behavior in adolescence; however, even though adolescents with clinical social phobia may report frequent negative self-focused thoughts, this may not be a clear associated symptom. However, such negative cognitions focused on self do not associate to self-reported social anxiety.
 [6]  Theories have also arisen looking at the efficacy of pharmacologic agents used to treat social phobia. Thus, serotonergic functioning might be involved, as serotonergic reuptake inhibitors help alleviate symptoms. Similarly, some researchers believe in an adrenergic etiology because of the success of propranolol therapy. Neurocircuitry involving the amygdala, a structure involved in fear, may be involved, as studies have found an exaggerated reactivity of the amygdala to aversive social stimuli in social anxiety.
 [7, 8]  Implications for treatment include the importance of not advancing treatment too quickly and triggering severe anxiety and early cessation of treatment; to enhance the ability to tolerate low levels of anxiety, the presence of a caregivier who is able to model adaptive functioning is desirable as an initial approach.
 [9]  Very low weight (600–1250 g) premature babies may also be at higher risk for later development of social anxiety disorder, possibly owing to abnormalities in the uncinate fasciculus, the major white matter tract connecting the frontal cortex to the amygdala, and other limbic temporal regions.
 [10]  One multisite study looked at whether treatment response was associated with specific genetic loci. Although treatment response was not assoicated with specific genetic loci, FKBP5, GR polymorphisms, or pretreatment percentage DNA methylation, the change in FKBP5 DNA methylation was nominally associated with treatment response as persons who demonstrated the greatest reduction in severity decreased in percentage DNA methylation during treatment compared with persons with one or more FKBP5 risk alleles who had little or no decrease or an increase in percentage of DNA methylation and did not show robust treatment response.
 [11] 