 Findings from neuropsychological studies suggest that the frontal cortex and the circuits linking them to the basal ganglia are critical for executive function and, therefore, to attention and exercising inhibition. Many findings support this view, including those described below. Executive functions are major tasks of the frontal lobes. MRI of the right mesial prefrontal cortex in persons with ADHD (ADD) strongly supports decreased activation (low arousal) during tasks that require inhibition of a planned motor response and timing of a motor response to a sensory cue. MRI in persons with ADHD (ADD) also strongly supports weakened activity in the right inferior prefrontal cortex and left caudate during a task that involves timing of a motor response to a sensory cue. In an effort to explore neural correlates that mediate response inhibition deficits in children with ADHD, Spinelli, et al (2011) examined functional MRI brain activation patterns of children aged 8-13 years with and without ADHD on a go/no-go task. While lapses in attention preceded response inhibition errors in the children without ADHD, brain circuitry involved in response selection and control was activated prior to errors in the children with ADHD.
 [5]  The catecholamines are the main neurotransmitters with frontal-lobe function. Catecholamine controlled dopaminergic and noradrenergic neurotransmission appear to be the main targets for medications used to treat ADHD (ADD). A 10-year study by National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) demonstrated that the brains of children and adolescents with ADHD (ADD) are 3-4% smaller than those of children without the disorder, and that pharmacologic treatment is not the cause. The more severe patients' ADHD (ADD) symptoms were, as rated by parents and clinicians, the smaller their frontal lobes, temporal gray matter, caudate nucleus, and cerebellum were. Data from 357 healthy subjects, obtained from the NIH MRI Study of Normal Brain Development, noted that a thinner cortex and slower cortical thinning was associated with higher attention problem scores, suggesting a link between attention and cortical maturation.
 [6]  In addition to the role of the neurotransmitters most commonly associated with the frontal lobes and the pathways mentioned above, some investigations have begun exploring a possible role for 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT). Although the brain’s motor regions are innervated by 5-HT projections, no connection between 5-HT and ADHD (ADD) motor pathology has yet been identified. However, connections have been made to attention-related processes. Altered 5-HT activity does appear to be at least part of the cause for difficulties with perceptual sensitivity and the appropriate recognition of the relative significance of stimulation.