 Serotonin pathways may be involved in the mediation of the anxious and obsessive qualities of selective mutism. This theory is reinforced by animal models of phobic behavior and by response to commonly prescribed medications such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), such as paroxetine, sertraline, or older heterocyclic-type antidepressants (eg, clomipramine [Anafranil]).
 [8]  Continued studies are needed to help to determine the genetics of anxiety-related negative valence system (NVS) traits (fear/threat, potential harm/anxiety, sustained threat/loss, frustrative non reward) as it continues to be challenging to identify candidate gene and Genome Wide Association Studies (GWAS).
 [9]  A study of 106 children with selective mutism also included 1028 young adults who completed measures of social interactional anxiety and 920 young adults with childhood behavioral inhibition.
 [10] The study found a nominal significance (P = .018) for association of selective mutism with rs2710102, which, with rs6944808, was part of a common haplotype associated with selective mutism (permutation P = .022). Adjusting for sex and ancestral proportion, each copy of the rs2710102*, a risk allele in the young adults, was associated with increased odds of being more than 1 standard deviation above the mean on the Social Interactional Anxiety Scale (odds ratio = 1.33; P = .015) and Retrospective Self-Report of Inhibition (odds ratio = 1.40; P = .010). This study is very encouraging that future genome-wide association studies might reflect an association of early onset variant of social anxiety disorder and selective mutism to a susceptibility gene, contactin-associated protein-like 2 (CNTNAP2), which has been found in other studies in relation to autism spectrum disorders. rs2710102 is a possible nonrisk allele for autism spectrum disorders and specific language impairment and may also relate to handedness.
 [11]  Behavioral inhibition is an early childhood temperament characterized by fearful responses to novelty and avoidance of social interactions. During adolescence, a subset of children with stable childhood behavioral inhibition develop social anxiety disorder and concurrently exhibit increased error monitoring. Increased error monitoring in 7-year-olds who were characterized regarding behavioral inhibition at age 24 and 36 months prospectively predicted risk for symptoms of social phobia at age 9 years in a study of 291 children. Those high in behavioral inhibition had increased error monitoring at age 7 years, as indexed by larger (ie, more negative) error-related negativity amplitudes. In addition, early behavioral inhibition was related to later childhood social phobia symptoms at age 9 years among children with a large difference in amplitude between error-related negativity and correct-response negativity at age 7 years. Heightened error monitoring predicts risk for later social phobia symptoms in children with high behavioral inhibition. Research assessing response monitoring in children with behavioral inhibition may refine our understanding of the mechanisms underlying risk for later anxiety disorders and the possible need for prevention efforts.
 [12]  Adolescents with early-life behavioral inhibition, similar to adolescents with social phobia, did not have striatal sensitivity to valence or self-reported affective sensitivity to incentive magnitude, which supported specificity in features of generalized anxiety disorder relative to social phobia or behavioral inhibition. Distinct striatal subregion responses showed a more generalized pattern of striatal response in adolescents with social phobia when compared with their healthy peers, and this pattern emerged across the caudate, putamen, and nucleus accumbens. Widespread magnitude-related incentive activations had underlied psychological states common to behavioral inhibition and social phobia, such as performance monitoring or sensitivity to feedback and caudate hyperactivation in social phobia, and behavioral inhibition suggested anomalies in goal-based processes, which were more strongly modulated in the caudate rather than in the putamen or nucleus accumbens.
 [13]  Two efferent feedback pathways to the auditory periphery may play a role in monitoring self-vocalization: the middle-ear acoustic reflex (MEAR) and the medial olivocochlear bundle (MOCB) reflex. In selective mutism compared with a group of normally developing control children, a significantly higher proportion of selective mutism children had abnormal MEAR and MOCB function (58.6% and 38%, respectively) compared with controls (9.7% and 8%, respectively). The overall prevalence of abnormal MEAR and/or MOCB function was significantly higher in the selective mutism group (71%) compared with controls (16%).
 [14] 